# nix-bonito

`bonito` is a declarative Nix channels manager. It is written to replace some of
Flakes' features. It also provides compatibility with the global Flakes registry.

## Install

```sh
go install github.com/diamondburned/nix-bonito/cmd/bonito@latest
```

## Usage

`bonito` is meant to be used with a VCS such as Git. As a result, changes to the
configuration file and its checksum files should be committed so that they can
be rolled back using the VCS.

```sh
# Initialize and update with an existing config.
bonito # uses $HOSTNAME.toml, OR
bonito -c hackadoll3.toml

# Update channels that are referenced as branches (refs), such as
# "github:NixOS/nixpkgs nixos-unstable".
bonito -u
```

For an example configuration, see the [Example file](./example/hackadoll3.toml).

### Using with Flakes

To use `bonito` with Flakes, simply toggle `flakes` on (see Example file) and
point your `nix.registry` file to the JSON file generated by `bonito`.

The generated file will end with `.registry.json`.

Example Nix configuration:

```nix
{ config, lib, pkgs, ... }:

{
  # generated from hackadoll3.toml
  nix.registry = builtins.fromJSON (builtins.readFile ./hackadoll3.registry.json);
}
```

## Why not Flakes?

In case you don't know, Nix introduced an experimental feature named
[Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes), which effectively allows the user to
declaratively define all impure inputs in a `flake.nix` file, completely
replacing Nix channels. These impure inputs are then locked in a `flake.lock`
file.

The idea of locking input dependencies under a file isn't new: we know that Go
does it with `go.mod`, Rust does it with `Cargo.lock`, NodeJS does it with
`package-lock.json`, etc.

The reason why I wrote bonito instead of using Flakes is because Flakes tries
too hard to be a smart tool, which ends up making it very frustrating to use. A
list of quirks that I don't like about Flakes include:

- Flakes detects if you're in a Git repository and impose weird restrictions
  based on that. This makes using it a bit more frustrating.
- Flakes are still mostly experimental. At the time this was written, the CLI
  tools have lots of quirks, many of which makes it barely usable.
- Flakes caused an infinite recursion error on my config for very mysterious
  reasons. Writing `bonito` took me less time than debugging that error.

## Known Quirks

**Error: cannot resolve lock: error reading symbolic link '...nixpkgs'**

Some channels, such as Home Manager, have a dependency on Nixpkgs. When `bonito`
starts without a `.lock` file, it must add a channel to resolve it, then remove
it. Home Manager cannot be added and updated without Nixpkgs, however, and there
is no way to keep the order of the channel list to express dependency, so this
use case is not supported at all.

A workaround is to run `bonito` on a setup with the `nixos` or `nixpkgs`
channel, then set `override-channels = false` first. Once the `.lock` file is
generated, `override-channels` can be set to true.
